Next piece of work is a personal
project that I completed
recently, about two months ago.
It's not a digital product, but
I think this one's quite relevant
because it demonstrates a process of
ideation through to a saleable product.
So in rock climbing, climbers
often cut their hands.
Over the course of long climbs, they tear
and rip their skin to pieces, and they
usually just end up packing the chalk,
which is magnesium carbonate-based, back
into those wounds as they're climbing.
It's great for drying, great for grip,
not so friendly to skin, hence the
skin ripping and tearing more easily.
So I was toying with the idea of could the
climbing chalk itself perhaps promote skin
healing, and ultimately, could it be a,
a small batch independent product simple
enough that I could produce it myself?
Could all the components be simple
enough that I could produce the whole
thing through to final product very
cheaply and simply, the packaging
components, the brand, website?
I was initially looking at
the healing properties of zinc
oxide and combining that as it's
commonly used in skincare products.
But after digging a little
deeper, I understood that
there's an environmental runoff.
Although it would be a perfectly
viable product on paper, I didn't
really want the burden of any sort
of unnecessary environmental impact.
I think it would go against the philosophy
of the brand I was trying to create.
So I started looking at more herbal,
traditional plant-based ingredients.
Finally ended up going with gotu
kola leaf, which is a bit like
matcha in that it's shade grown.
The leaves specifically when
in powdered form have potential
skin healing properties.
The main benefit being it's a plant
ingredient already in powdered
form, not chemical or man-made,
so any potential environmental
impact is kept really minimal.
And then I wanted to keep that sort of
ideology consistent across the brand.
All climbing chalks out there on the
market, which are a hundred percent
magnesium carbonate-based, are literally
that one ingredient, magnesium carbonate.
And that's it.
There's not a huge
difference between brands.
It's exactly the same product.
It just comes down to marketing.
I noticed a lot of the big
climbing chalks, they all heavily
try to lean towards performance.
Branding's like big, powerful,
in your face, bold graphics.
The best grip ever.
The grippiest grip.
The names themselves are like Supergrip,
Gorilla Grip, Max Strength, all these sort
of power and performance and speed and
agility, all high-performance focused.
But if you actually take some
time to think about the process
of rock climbing, real ascents
actually take a lot of preparation.
They take a lot of time.
It's a slow and considered thing.
Some ascents can take years.
They map their routes.
They're coming back months later
just to test different grips.
Each hold and each
transition is intentional.
It's a slow, considered process
that you develop over time.
So with the brand, I wanted it to speak
more to the process of climbing and to
real climbers and their relationship
to climbing, which is usually a
very calm and considered approach.
The human, the environment, the
wall, the touch, the feeling,
it's a raw, primal activity.
Balance is required.
It's an art to calm inner
mind at those heights.
There's a long-term game to climbing.
It's not an instant thing.
Nothing digital about it.
It's actually my response to the
oversaturation of technology,
particularly with the acceleration
of AI and automation at the moment.
I think, um, every company right now
has realized that they can create
software or a digital tool really
easily and cheaply with AI, right?
So everyone seems to be caught up in
this B2B rat race of trying to sell
each other their own little piece of
SaaS software that they just vibe coded.
If you're a company doing that, all you're
really banking on is that company that
you're selling your software to having
not yet wrapped their heads around AI and
understood that they can do this in-house.
It's not a long-term business model.
These are like short-term plays
just trying to capitalize on the
very brief window of AI ignorance.
As soon as those remaining companies wake
up, oh, we can do this in-house ourselves,
at the very least for very basic use case
tooling, SaaS is effectively kinda dead.
I wanted to create something physical
that didn't rely on anything digital.
The intention that it might
serve a societal shift away from
digitization as AI sort of forces
us to actually think more and more
about what it means to be human.
Running clubs, techless retreats, hiking,
camping, surfing, van life, climbing
itself, and other outdoor activities.
There's a real reason behind
the fact these are gaining
more and more in popularity.
What we're really living through is
oversaturation in technology right now,
and as we lean too far into that, there's
this reaction to come back and rebalance.
So that's potentially why we're
seeing more of these symptoms.
We're finding more value
in things that take time.
We're engaging more with longer
processes rather than instant outcomes.
The word mark itself, I want it to be
very primitive as if you've just scratched
it and just carved that into the rock
or scratched that in with a stone.
I was looking at, like, cave
paintings, early man art, to give
that, like, kind of grassroots.
So stripping all this performance
element away and getting right back
to what climbing really feels like,
very human, so almost anti-branding.
Also, the fact that it's independent
and, like- handmade further communicates
this really human element that most big
commercial products completely miss.
And keeping on this ancient idea and this
philosophy of balance and minimalism,
I was looking at Japanese design and
minimalism, and coupled with, the
utility of Scandi design and this idea of
something being utilitarian really speaks
to self-sufficiency, being outdoors,
and only having the tools that you need.
Everything purposeful,
nothing unnecessary.
So the product being just two
ingredients, I wanted that simplicity
to be consistent throughout.
I wanted the packaging to
be minimal, cheap, but super
effective for its utility.
In terms of design influence,
vintage steel tins that I
came across I really liked.
So originally for micro machine parts.
These would be produced by the factory
that produces the parts themselves.
What was the closest and cheapest
thing I could get to that?
It was a case of repurposing these,
these, uh, food tins, sort of maintaining
that utilitarian aesthetic really
cheaply and no plastics whatsoever.
So again, really simple.
Two components, natural card lid.
That, again, remains consistent throughout
the, uh, the postage packets as well.
Very simple, minimal, nothing in your
face, nothing more than what's needed.
No plastics.
The site itself is scratch-built
and vibe-coded, GitHub hosted
freely, with just a simple
Stripe checkout on the back end.
The idea for the site was to present
the product like a museum artifact,
which again communicates this idea of a
tool that has been developed over time.
There'd be a new batch of
chalk maybe once a month.
Each new batch would have a new
artwork on the lid accompanied
by a different philosophy.
So right now on the site it says, "Chalk.
Care.
From my hands to yours." That little
quote or philosophy would change to
accompany a new artwork each time,
with the idea that all those artifacts
would then be archived on the site.
You can go through the archive and it'll
change the virtual lid on the artifact.
So I actually took a few photo
scans of the, the product in
reality to generate some CG models.
Dropped that basic model then into
Blender, cleaned it up to get it looking
a little bit more realistic, and then
finalized by adding the materials.
And the background tone of the
site is the color of the chalk.
Because the gotu kola leaf is just in
its raw powder form, it's not relying
on any carrier like an oil or a cream
like you'd find in traditional skincare.
On a single use, it wouldn't get
any chance to absorb into your
skin and wouldn't be effective.
But if you think about climbing, you're
always reapplying and redusting over
the course of a long climb, so really
it's this compounding effect, right?
So the more you use it,
the more it gives back.
Again, it's that compounding
effect over time that mirrors
the very process of climbing.
It's not like an instant
one-use healing cream.
It's not this Band-Aid solution.
It's a tool that's intended to be
used and continually worked with
and develop with you over time.
I'd expect with continual use, when you're
reaching kind of the 80% of your climb,
in theory, your skin condition is in
a slightly better-off place that might
give you that second wind to go ahead and
complete that final 20% of your climb.
Of course, you could market the
hell out of something like this.
It's the only gotu kola leaf climbing
chalk in existence at the moment.
Helping Hand obviously works
on a few different levels.
It's helping the hands, and if
you're hanging onto something, you
might reach for a helping hand.
Also, if I was to sell a product, I
don't really want to, if I can help it,
rely on any of the popular big online
marketplaces for obvious reasons.
Ideal retailers would be independent,
like family-run businesses, small
climbing shops that are eco-conscious
and all about sustainability.
Something close to like
the Eden Project store.
But for me, really selling it wasn't
the point at the end of the day.
As I say, it was just something I wanted
to see if I could get from ideation to
viable, saleable product and produce
it very cheaply and produce it myself.